
1. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:601368. doi: 10.1155/2013/601368. Epub 2013 Dec 24.

Do telomeres adapt to physiological stress? Exploring the effect of exercise on
telomere length and telomere-related proteins.

Ludlow AT(1), Ludlow LW(2), Roth SM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75309,
USA.
(2)Department of Applied Physiology and Wellness, Southern Methodist University,
Dallas, TX 75206, USA.
(3)Department of Kinesiology, School of Public Health, University of Maryland,
College Park, MD 20742-2611, USA.

Aging is associated with a tissue degeneration phenotype marked by a loss of
tissue regenerative capacity. Regenerative capacity is dictated by environmental 
and genetic factors that govern the balance between damage and repair. The
age-associated changes in the ability of tissues to replace lost or damaged cells
is partly the cause of many age-related diseases such as Alzheimer's disease,
cardiovascular disease, type II diabetes, and sarcopenia. A well-established
marker of the aging process is the length of the protective cap at the ends of
chromosomes, called telomeres. Telomeres shorten with each cell division and with
increasing chronological age and short telomeres have been associated with a
range of age-related diseases. Several studies have shown that chronic exposure
to exercise (i.e., exercise training) is associated with telomere length
maintenance; however, recent evidence points out several controversial issues
concerning tissue-specific telomere length responses. The goals of the review are
to familiarize the reader with the current telomere dogma, review the literature 
exploring the interactions of exercise with telomere phenotypes, discuss the
mechanistic research relating telomere dynamics to exercise stimuli, and finally 
propose future directions for work related to telomeres and physiological stress.

PMCID: PMC3884693
PMID: 24455708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 9;8(12):e81877. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081877. eCollection
2013.

Healthy lifestyles reduce the incidence of chronic diseases and dementia:
evidence from the Caerphilly cohort study.

Elwood P(1), Galante J(1), Pickering J(1), Palmer S(1), Bayer A(1), Ben-Shlomo
Y(2), Longley M(3), Gallacher J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cochrane Institute of Primary Care and Public Health, Cardiff University,
Cardiff, United Kingdom.
(2)School of Social and Community Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol, United
Kingdom.
(3)Welsh Institute for Health and Social Care, University of South Wales,
Pontypridd, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Healthy lifestyles based on non-smoking, an acceptable BMI, a high
fruit and vegetable intake, regular physical activity, and low/moderate alcohol
intake, are associated with reductions in the incidence of certain chronic
diseases, but to date there is limited evidence on cognitive function and
dementia.
METHODS: In 1979 healthy behaviours were recorded on 2,235 men aged 45-59 years
in Caerphilly, UK. During the following 30 years incident diabetes, vascular
disease, cancer and death were recorded, and in 2004 cognitive state was
determined.
FINDINGS: Men who followed four or five of the behaviours had an odds ratio (OR) 
and confidence intervals (CI) for diabetes, corrected for age and social class,
of 0.50 (95% CI: 0.19, 1.31; P for trend with increasing numbers of healthy
behaviours <0.0005). For vascular disease the OR was 0.50 (95% CI: 0.30, 0.84; P 
for trend <0.0005), and there was a delay in vascular disease events of up to 12 
years. Cancer incidence was not significantly related to lifestyle although there
was a reduction associated with non-smoking (OR: 0.65; 95% CI: 0.54, 0.79).
All-cause mortality was reduced in men following four or five behaviours (OR
0.40; 95% CI: 0.24, 0.67; P for trend <0.005). After further adjustment for NART,
the OR for men following four or five healthy behaviours was 0.36 (95% CI: 0.12, 
1.09; P for trend <0.001) for cognitive impairment, and 0.36 (95% CI: 0.07, 1.99;
P for trend <0.02) for dementia. The adoption of a healthy lifestyle by men was
low and appears not to have changed during the subsequent 30 years, with under 1%
of men following all five of the behaviours and 5% reporting four or more in 1979
and in 2009.
INTERPRETATION: A healthy lifestyle is associated with increased disease-free
survival and reduced cognitive impairment but the uptake remains low.

PMCID: PMC3857242
PMID: 24349147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Duke Med Health News. 2013 Oct;19(10):5-6.

Control blood sugar levels to reduce risk of Alzheimer's. Lifestyle
modifications--diet and exercise--can help manage blood glucose.

[No authors listed]

PMID: 24288814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Semin Speech Lang. 2013 Aug;34(3):170-84. doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1358370. Epub 2013 
Oct 28.

Language-enriched exercise plus socialization for older adults with dementia:
translation to rural communities.

La Rue A(1), Felten K, Duschene K, MacFarlane D, Price S, Zimmerman S, Hafez S.

Author information: 
(1)Wisconsin Alzheimer's Institute, School of Medicine and Public Health, University
of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin.

Interventions that stimulate and engage individuals with dementia physically,
cognitively, and socially offer promise for improving health and well-being and
for potentially slowing functional losses with disease progression. We describe a
volunteer-based intervention that combines physical exercise,
cognitive-linguistic stimulation, and social outings for older persons living
with dementia in rural communities. One-year follow-up data, although clearly
preliminary (n = 8), suggest stability in global cognition, mood, and aspects of 
physical fitness. Challenges to implementing dementia interventions in rural
areas are discussed.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

PMID: 24166191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Int J Nurs Pract. 2013 Sep;19 Suppl 3:56-63. doi: 10.1111/ijn.12174.

Degree of ambulation and factors associated with the median distance moved per
day in Alzheimer's disease patients.

Nishikata S(1), Yamakawa M, Shigenobu K, Suto S, Makimoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Nursing, Division of Health Sciences, Graduate School of
Medicine, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

The Integrated Circuit tag monitoring system became available to measure
wandering in terms of the distance moved by dementia patients. The purposes of
the study were to describe degree of ambulation in patients with Alzheimer's
disease (AD) and to examine factors associated with the distance moved. AD
patients were recruited at a dementia care unit in Asakayama Hospital, Osaka,
Japan. The monitoring system generated the distance moved per day. Demographic
and clinical data were abstracted from medical records. Mini-Mental State
Examination was used to measure cognitive function. A multiple linear regression 
was used to predict the distance moved per day. The research was approved by the 
ethics committee of the university and the hospital, and written informed consent
was obtained from the patients' proxies. Majority of the AD subjects monitored
had moderate to advance stage of dementia. Patients' age and cognitive function
were predictors of the median distance moved/day, and these two variables
explained almost half of the variance. Older age and lower cognitive function
were associated with reduced median distance moved per day in AD patients.

© 2013 Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 24090298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Brain Res. 2013 Nov 20;1539:95-104. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2013.10.004. Epub
2013 Oct 9.

Physical activity and the brain: a review of this dynamic, bi-directional
relationship.

Loprinzi PD(1), Herod SM, Cardinal BJ, Noakes TD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Exercise Science, Lansing School of Nursing and Health Sciences,
Bellarmine University, 2001 Newburg Road, Louisville, KY 40205, USA. Electronic
address: ploprinzi@bellarmine.edu.

The brain plays a major role in regulating physical activity behavior and
exercise performance. Regular physical activity may also play a key role in the
prevention and treatment of various neurological conditions, such as Parkinson's 
disease, Alzheimer's disease, depression, and cognitive function. This implies
that not only does the brain (or the nervous system) regulate aspects of physical
activity, but also that physical activity may potentially influence brain-related
function and outcomes. This review details this bi-directional relationship and
addresses its implications for improving physical activity, exercise performance,
and brain-related function and outcomes.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24120986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Neurochem. 2013 Oct;127(1):4-6. doi: 10.1111/jnc.12406.

Is exercise-in-a-bottle likely to proffer new insights into Alzheimer's disease?

Correia SC(1), Perry G, Castellani R, Moreira PI.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Coimbra,
Portugal; Institute for Interdisciplinary Research, University of Coimbra,
Coimbra, Portugal.

PMCID: PMC3831604
PMID: 24074055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2013 Jul;16(4):492-8.

Current world literature. Carbohydrates.

[No authors listed]

PMID: 23885358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. MAbs. 2013 Sep-Oct;5(5):665-77. doi: 10.4161/mabs.25424. Epub 2013 Jun 20.

Early intervention in the 3xTg-AD mice with an amyloid β-antibody fragment
ameliorates first hallmarks of Alzheimer disease.

Giménez-Llort L(1), Rivera-Hernández G, Marin-Argany M, Sánchez-Quesada JL,
Villegas S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Neurociències; Unitat de Biociències; Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona; Barcelona, Spain; Departament de Psiquiatria i Medicina Legal; Unitat 
de Biociències; Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona; Barcelona, Spain.

The single-chain variable fragment, scFv-h3D6, has been shown to prevent in vitro
toxicity induced by the amyloid β (Aβ) peptide in neuroblastoma cell cultures by 
withdrawing Aβ oligomers from the amyloid pathway. Present study examined the in 
vivo effects of scFv-h3D6 in the triple-transgenic 3xTg-AD mouse model of
Alzheimer disease. Prior to the treatment, five-month-old female animals,
corresponding to early stages of the disease, showed the first behavioral and
psychological symptoms of dementia -like behaviors. Cognitive deficits included
long- and short-term learning and memory deficits and high swimming navigation
speed. After a single intraperitoneal dose of scFv-h3D6, the swimming speed was
reversed to normal levels and the learning and memory deficits were ameliorated. 
Brain tissues of these animals revealed a global decrease of Aβ oligomers in the 
cortex and olfactory bulb after treatment, but this was not seen in the
hippocampus and cerebellum. In the untreated 3xTg-AD animals, we observed an
increase of both apoJ and apoE concentrations in the cortex, as well as an
increase of apoE in the hippocampus. Treatment significantly recovered the
non-pathological levels of these apolipoproteins. Our results suggest that the
benefit of scFv-h3D6 occurs at both behavioral and molecular levels.

PMCID: PMC3851220
PMID: 23884018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Aging Health. 2013 Oct;25(7):1143-58. doi: 10.1177/0898264313494803. Epub 2013 
Jul 5.

What are older Latinos told about physical activity and cognition? A content
analysis of a top-circulating magazine.

Rose ID(1), Friedman DB, Marquez DX, Fernandez K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Promotion, Education, and Behavior, University of South
Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Physical activity (PA) may reduce risk of developing Alzheimer's
disease (AD). The objectives of this study were to: (a) Compare the content of
English and Spanish PA-focused articles in American Association of Retired
Persons (AARP) magazines; and (b) Determine whether these articles discuss PA as 
a potential correlate of AD.
METHOD: AARP (English) and AARP Segunda Juventud (Spanish) magazines were
assessed for PA coverage from 2009 to 2010. Articles were analyzed using
nonparametric tests.
RESULTS: A total of 63 articles discussed PA (48 English; 15 Spanish). In AARP
English, 70.8% of articles discussed formal exercise, while 53.3% of Spanish
articles discussed formal exercise. Only three English articles mentioned that PA
has the potential to reduce risk of AD. No Spanish articles mentioned this
association.
DISCUSSION: Spanish content did not adequately present cognitive health
information. Culturally appropriate media coverage is needed to inform diverse
populations about cognitive health and risks of AD.

PMID: 23832842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. CNS Neurosci Ther. 2013 Oct;19(10):795-803. doi: 10.1111/cns.12139. Epub 2013 Jul
4.

Aerobic exercise combined with antioxidative treatment does not counteract
moderate- or mid-stage Alzheimer-like pathophysiology of APP/PS1 mice.

Xu ZQ(1), Zhang LQ, Wang Q, Marshall C, Xiao N, Gao JY, Wu T, Ding J, Hu G, Xiao 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Neurodegeneration, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing,
Jiangsu, China.

AIMS: The present study evaluated the combined treatment effects of aerobic
exercise and antioxidative stress on moderate-stage Alzheimer's disease (AD).
METHODS: Ten-month-old APP/PS1 mice were given antioxidative treatment with
acetylcysteine, along with aerobic exercise for 6 weeks. Spatial learning and
memory were tested using the Morris water maze, and β-amyloid (Aβ) plaque
deposits in the forebrain were quantified by Thioflavin-S staining. Levels of
soluble Aβ1-42, β-secretase enzyme, ү-secretase enzyme, oxidative and antioxidant
stress markers nitrotyrosine and peroxiredoxin-1, glial markers glial fibrillary 
acidic protein and ionized calcium-binding adaptor molecule 1, and synaptic
protein synaptophysin in the hippocampus were all measured by western blotting
and/or immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: APP/PS1 mice showed severe declines in spatial learning and memory
compared with their wild-type littermates, which were not attenuated by aerobic
exercise combined with antioxidative treatment. The pathologic analysis revealed 
that Aβ deposition and production, oxidative stress, glial inflammation, and
synaptic loss were not mitigated in the brain of exercised APP/PS1 mice, compared
with the sedentary APP/PS1 animals.
CONCLUSION: This study reveals that a combined treatment of aerobic exercise plus
antioxidative stress does not counteract pathophysiology in the moderate- or
mid-stages of AD.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23827013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Duke Med Health News. 2013 May;19(5):8.

Is there any way I can prevent, or at least reduce my risk of developing
Alzheimer's disease or other dementias?

[No authors listed]

PMID: 23802333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Jun 20;4:e678. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.194.

Enriched environment and physical activity reverse astrogliodegeneration in the
hippocampus of AD transgenic mice.

Rodríguez JJ, Terzieva S, Olabarria M, Lanza RG, Verkhratsky A.

PMCID: PMC3702309
PMID: 23788035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Curr Top Behav Neurosci. 2013;15:313-40. doi: 10.1007/7854_2012_237.

Prolonged running, not fluoxetine treatment, increases neurogenesis, but does not
alter neuropathology, in the 3xTg mouse model of Alzheimer's disease.

Marlatt MW(1), Potter MC, Bayer TA, van Praag H, Lucassen PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Swammerdam Institute for Life Science-Center for Neuroscience, University of
Amsterdam, Science Park 904, 1098 XH, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Reductions in adult neurogenesis have been documented in the original 3xTg mouse 
model of Alzheimer's disease (AD), notably occurring at the same age when spatial
memory deficits and amyloid plaque pathology appeared. As this suggested reduced 
neurogenesis was associated with behavioral deficits, we tested whether activity 
and pharmacological stimulation could prevent memory deficits and modify
neurogenesis and/or neuropathology in the 3xTg model backcrossed to the C57Bl/6
strain. We chronically administered the antidepressant fluoxetine to one group of
mice, allowed access to a running wheel in another, and combined both treatments 
in a third cohort. All treatments lasted for 11 months. The female 3xTg mice
failed to exhibit any deficits in spatial learning and memory as measured in the 
Morris water maze, indicating that when backcrossed to the C57Bl/6 strain, the
3xTg mice lost the behavioral phenotype that was present in the original 3xTg
mouse maintained on a hybrid background. Despite this, the backcrossed 3xTg mice 
expressed prominent intraneuronal amyloid beta (Aβ) levels in the cortex and
amygdala, with lower levels in the CA1 area of the hippocampus. In the combined
cohort, fluoxetine treatment interfered with exercise and reduced the total
distance run. The extent of Aβ neuropathology, the tau accumulations, or BDNF
levels, were not altered by prolonged exercise. Thus, neuropathology was present 
but not paralleled by spatial memory deficits in the backcrossed 3xTg mouse model
of AD. Prolonged exercise for 11 months did improve the long-term survival of
newborn neurons generated during middle-age, whereas fluoxetine had no effect. We
further review and discuss the relevant literature in this respect.

PMID: 23670818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2013 Jun;10(5):507-15.

Treadmill exercise prevents learning and memory impairment in Alzheimer's
disease-like pathology.

Dao AT(1), Zagaar MA, Levine AT, Salim S, Eriksen JL, Alkadhi KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of PPS, College of Pharmacy, University of Houston, Houston, TX
77204-5037, USA.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder that is characterized by
progressive memory loss. In contrast, accumulating evidence suggests a
neuroprotective role of regular exercise in aging associated memory impairment.
In this study, we investigated the ability of regular exercise to prevent
impairments of short-term memory (STM) and early long-term potentiation (E-LTP)
in area CA1 of the hippocampus in a rat model of AD (i.c.v. infusion of 250
pmol/day Aβ1-42 peptides). We utilized behavioral assessment, in vivo
electrophysiological recording, and immunoblotting in 4 groups of adult Wistar
rats: control, treadmill exercise (Ex), β-amyloid-infused (Aβ), and
amyloid-infused/treadmill exercised (Ex/Aβ). Our findings indicated that Aβ rats 
made significantly more errors in the radial arm water maze (RAWM) compared to
all other groups and exhibited suppressed E-LTP in area CA1, which correlated
with deleterious alterations in the levels of memory and E-LTP-related signaling 
molecules including calcineurin (PP2B), brain derivedneurotrophic factor (BDNF)
and phosphorylated CaMKII (p-CaMKII). Compared to controls, Ex and Ex/Aβ rats
showed a similar behavioral performance and a normal E-LTP with no detrimental
changes in the levels of PP2B, BDNF, and p- CaMKII. We conclude that treadmill
exercise maybe able to prevent cognitive impairment associated with AD pathology.

PMCID: PMC4004077
PMID: 23627709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. BMJ. 2013 Apr 17;346:f2422. doi: 10.1136/bmj.f2422.

Exercise slows decline in adults with Alzheimer's disease.

[No authors listed]

PMID: 23596226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2013 Jun;10(5):482-93.

Rapid improvement of canine cognitive dysfunction with immunotherapy designed for
Alzheimer's disease.

Bosch MN(1), Gimeno-Bayón J, Rodríguez MJ, Pugliese M, Mahy N.

Author information: 
(1)Medivet Pharma SL, Masies de Roda, Barcelona, Spain. neusbosch@ub.edu

Immunotherapy against amyloid-β(Aβ) may improve rodent cognitive function by
reducing amyloid neuropathology and is being validated in clinical trials with
positive preliminary results. However, for a complete understanding of the direct
and long-term immunization responses in the aged patient, and also to avoid
significant side effects, several key aspects remain to be clarified. Thus, to
investigate brain Aβ clearance and Th2 responses in the elderly, and the reverse 
inflammatory events not found in the immunized rodent, better Alzheimer's disease
(AD) models are required. In the aged familiar canine with a Cognitive
Dysfunction Syndrome (CDS) we describe the rapid effectiveness and the full
safety profile of a new active vaccine candidate for human AD prevention and
treatment. In these aged animals, besidesa weak immune system, the antibody
response activated a coordinated central and peripheral Aβ clearance, that
rapidly improved their cognitive function in absence of any side effects. Our
results also confirm the interest to use familiar dogs to develop innovative and 
reliable therapies for AD.

PMID: 23566345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Mayo Clin Health Lett. 2013 Jan;31(1):4-5.

Exercise and brain health. Preventing Alzheimer's and more.

[No authors listed]

PMID: 23565563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Gerontol Nurs. 2013 May;39(5):11-4. doi: 10.3928/00989134-20130313-04. Epub
2013 Mar 22.

Monitoring exercise delivery to increase participation adherence in older adults 
with Alzheimer's disease.

Watson E(1), Yu F.

Author information: 
(1)M.C. Perry High School, Department of Defense Education Activity, Marine Corps
Air Station, Iwakuni, Japan. elle.watson@pac.dodea.edu

There are many established benefits of exercise for older adults. Emerging
studies suggest that it may even be able to slow the progression of Alzheimer's
disease (AD) in older adults with the disease. However, it is yet unknown how
bedside nurses can monitor ongoing exercise participation in this population due 
to the complexity and impact of AD symptoms. The purpose of this study is to
provide bedside nurses with tools to capture actual received exercise doses to
ensure adequate exercise participation by older adults with AD. This study is a
secondary data analysis of a master study in which 8 participants who were
clinically diagnosed with AD participated in moderate intensity aerobic exercise 
for 10 to 45 minutes, three times per week, for 6 months. The results show that
participants were able to meet the overall exercise prescription 74.3% of the
time. The findings of this study suggest that bedside nurses are able to monitor 
the actual exercise delivery (frequency, intensity, and duration) to ensure
exercise participation.

Copyright 2013, SLACK Incorporated.

PMID: 23506126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Duke Med Health News. 2013 Feb;19(2):4-5.

Enocuraging news in Alzheimer's prevention and treatment. Research continues to
underscore the value of cardiovascular health in relation to brain function.

[No authors listed]

PMID: 23495420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Nutr Health Aging. 2013 Mar;17(3):252-7. doi: 10.1007/s12603-012-0402-8.

A review of multidomain interventions to support healthy cognitive ageing.

Schneider N(1), Yvon C.

Author information: 
(1)Nestec Ltd., Nestlé Research Center Lausanne, Switzerland.

OBJECTIVE: The risk for cognitive decline and for developing Alzheimer's disease 
increases with age. The aetiology is assumed to be of multi-factorial origin, and
treatment opportunities are lacking. Despite the multi-factorial origin, many
intervention studies focused on single factors to influence cognitive health with
inconsistent findings. In this view, more and more intervention studies aim to
intervene on multiple factors simultaneously to affect or slow down cognitive
decline. The purpose of this paper is to give an overview of these multidomain
intervention trials.
METHODS: We conducted a non-systematic literature search in Medline, Scopus,
Cochrane Library, and clinical trials databases up to October 2011 to review
multidomain interventions that investigated effects of combined lifestyle-related
factors on cognitive decline and the progression of dementia.
RESULTS: Interest in multidomain interventions increased over the past years. We 
identified six completed and published trials and eight ongoing or not yet
published studies that investigated effects on cognitive outcomes. First
completed trials yielded promising results for the combination of exercise and
mental training and diet and behavioural weight management. Results of ongoing
multidomain trials are awaited.
CONCLUSIONS: Some evidence suggests that strategies which target multiple factors
simultaneously may prove more effective than those focusing on a single mechanism
or domain. Larger high-quality randomized controlled trials are required to
systematically investigate the cognitive effect of programs comprising physical
and mental activity as well as nutritional aspects.

PMID: 23459978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Nutr Health Aging. 2013 Mar;17(3):235-9. doi: 10.1007/s12603-012-0394-4.

Gait variability at fast-pace walking speed: a biomarker of mild cognitive
impairment?

Beauchet O(1), Allali G, Launay C, Herrmann FR, Annweiler C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Division of Geriatric Medicine, Angers University
Hospital, Angers, France. olbeauchet@chu-angers.fr

BACKGROUND: The interpretation of the increase in stride-to-stride variability of
stride time (STV) regarding the evolution of cognitive deficits across the
dementia spectrum is matter of debate.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to compare STV at usual and fast-pace
walking speeds of MCI patients with that of cognitively healthy individuals (CHI)
and Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients with mild dementia, while considering the
effects of potential confounders.
METHODS: STV while walking at usual and fast-pace walking speeds was recorded
with the GAITRite® system from 116 older adults (mean age 75.6±6.5 years; 55.2%
female) divided into 3 groups according to their cognitive status (44 CHI, 39 MCI
patients and 33 AD patients with mild dementia).
RESULTS: The full adjusted multiple linear regression models showed that high STV
was associated with slow gait speed at usual-pace walking speed (P=0.002) and
with the MCI status at fast-pace walking speed (P=0.015).
CONCLUSIONS: High STV at fast-pace walking speed was a specific gait disturbance 
of MCI patients in the sample of studied participants, and thus could be used in 
the future as a specific biomarker of MCI patients.

PMID: 23459976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2013 Sep;68(9):1083-90. doi:
10.1093/gerona/glt013. Epub 2013 Feb 18.

Frailty and incident dementia.

Gray SL(1), Anderson ML, Hubbard RA, LaCroix A, Crane PK, McCormick W, Bowen JD, 
McCurry SM, Larson EB.

Author information: 
(1)PharmD, MS, School of Pharmacy, University of Washington, Box 357630, Seattle, WA
98195-7630, USA. slgray@u.washington.edu

BACKGROUND: We sought to examine whether frailty is associated with dementia,
Alzheimer's disease (AD), and non-AD dementia risk.
METHODS: This is a prospective population-based cohort derived from an integrated
health maintenance organization. The sample consisted of 2,619 participants aged 
65 and older without dementia at baseline followed from 1994 to 2010. Frailty was
defined as having at least 3 of the following criteria: weakness (grip strength),
slowness (walking speed), weight loss, low physical activity, and self-reported
exhaustion. Follow-up occurred every 2 years to identify incident dementia,
possible or probable AD, and non-AD dementia using standard research criteria.
Covariates came from self-report and study measures. We used adjusted Cox
proportional hazards models to examine the association between frailty and each
outcome.
RESULTS: Over a mean follow-up of 6.5 years, 521 participants developed dementia 
(of which 448 developed AD). In the model adjusted for age, sex, education, and
race, the hazard ratio for frailty was 1.78 (95% confidence interval [CI]
1.32-2.40). In the fully adjusted models, the hazard ratio for frailty was 1.20
for all-cause dementia (95% CI 0.85-1.69), 1.08 for AD (95% CI 0.74-1.57), and
2.57 for non-AD dementia (95% CI 1.08-6.11). For all-cause dementia, we found an 
interaction between baseline cognitive score and frailty (p = .02); hazard ratio 
for frailty was 1.78 for those with higher global cognition (95% CI 1.14-2.78)
and 0.79 for those with lower global cognition (95% CI 0.50-1.26).
CONCLUSION: Frailty was associated with dementia when adjusting only for
demographic variables but not in the fully adjusted model. Frailty was associated
with higher risk of developing non-AD dementia but not AD. Although frailty was
not associated with all-cause dementia in the entire sample, an association did
exist in participants with higher cognitive scores. Mechanisms underlying these
associations remain to be elucidated.

PMCID: PMC3738027
PMID: 23419778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Geriatr Nurs. 2013 May-Jun;34(3):181-6. doi: 10.1016/j.gerinurse.2012.12.014.
Epub 2013 Feb 12.

Improving recruitment, retention, and adherence to 6-month cycling in Alzheimer's
disease.

Yu F.

Author information: 
University of Minnesota, School of Nursing, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
yuxxx244@umn.edu

There is a pressing need to establish recruitment, retention, and adherence
feasibility to inform clinical trials that will evaluate how exercise affects the
symptoms and disease trajectory in Alzheimer's disease (AD). This paper reported 
the recruitment rate, retention, and adherence from a 6-month cycling study in
community-dwelling older adults with mild-to-moderate AD using a single-group,
repeated-measures design. Seven recruitment strategies were tested. Participants 
were prescribed an individualized, 15-45-min moderate intensity cycling 3 times a
week for 6 months. The results showed a 1.87 recruitment rate (No. of
participants recruited per month per site), 78.6% retention (No. of
completers/No. of enrolled participants), and 86.4% adherence (number sessions
meeting prescription dose/total number of sessions). The findings addressed a
major gap in aerobic exercise studies in AD. Successful recruitment relies on
community partnership, whereas strategies for ensuring participant exercise
safety collectively improved retention and adherence.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Mosby, Inc.

PMID: 23414638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Eur J Epidemiol. 2013 Mar;28(3):277-83. doi: 10.1007/s10654-013-9773-3. Epub 2013
Feb 6.

The association between physical activity and dementia in an elderly population: 
the Rotterdam Study.

de Bruijn RF(1), Schrijvers EM, de Groot KA, Witteman JC, Hofman A, Franco OH,
Koudstaal PJ, Ikram MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus MC University Medical Center, PO Box 2040,
3000 CA, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Erratum in
    Eur J Epidemiol. 2013 May;28(5):447-8.

Several studies have associated physical activity with the risk of dementia, but 
mostly did so during short follow-up. It remains unclear whether physical
activity also affects dementia during longer follow-up. We examined the
association between physical activity and risk of dementia during a follow-up
period up to 14 years. From 1997 to 1999, physical activity was assessed using a 
validated questionnaire in 4,406 elderly persons (age range 61-97) from the
prospective, population-based Rotterdam Study. Follow-up for dementia was
complete until January 1, 2011. We used Cox proportional hazards models to assess
the association between physical activity and incident dementia. Next, we
stratified follow-up time using a cut-off of 4 years. We separately investigated 
dementia due to Alzheimer disease. During 38,631 person-years, 583 participants
developed dementia. When adjusting for age and sex, we found a borderline
significant association between higher physical activity and lower risk of
dementia (HR 0.95; 95% CI 0.87-1.04). This association was confined to follow-up 
up to 4 years (HR 0.82; 95% CI 0.71-0.95), and not to follow-up of at least 4
years (HR 1.04; 95% CI 0.93-1.16). Additional adjustments only slightly
attenuated the associations. A similar pattern was present for Alzheimer disease.
We found a higher level of physical activity to be associated with a lower risk
of dementia. This association was confined to follow-up for up to 4 years and not
to longer follow-up, suggesting either a role for reverse causality or only a
short term effect of late-life physical activity in an elderly population.

PMID: 23385659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Neurotox Res. 2013 Aug;24(2):148-63. doi: 10.1007/s12640-012-9373-0. Epub 2013
Jan 11.

Neuroprotective effect of physical exercise in a mouse model of Alzheimer's
disease induced by β-amyloid₁₋₄₀ peptide.

Souza LC(1), Filho CB, Goes AT, Fabbro LD, de Gomes MG, Savegnago L, Oliveira MS,
Jesse CR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Avaliações Farmacológicas e Toxicológicas Aplicadas às Moléculas
Bioativas-LaftamBio Pampa, Universidade Federal do Pampa, Itaqui, RS, CEP
97650-000, Brazil.

This study was designed to investigate the potential neuroprotective effect of
exercise in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease (AD) induced by
intracerebroventricular (i.c.v.) injection of beta-amyloid₁₋₄₀ (Aβ₁₋₄₀) peptide. 
For this aim, male Swiss Albino mice were submitted to swimming training (ST)
with progressive increase in intensity and duration for 8 weeks before Aβ₁₋₄₀
administration (400 pmol/animal; 3 μl/site, i.c.v. route). The cognitive
behavioral, oxidative stress, and neuroinflammatory markers in hippocampus and
prefrontal cortex of mice were assessed 7 days after Aβ₁₋₄₀ administration. Our
results demonstrated that ST was effective in preventing impairment in short- and
long-term memories in the object recognition test. ST attenuated the increased
levels of reactive species and decreased non-protein thiol levels in hippocampus 
and prefrontal cortex induced by Aβ₁₋₄₀. Also, Aβ₁₋₄₀ inhibited superoxide
dismutase activity and increased glutathione peroxidase, glutathione reductase,
and glutathione S-transferase activities in hippocampus and prefrontal
cortex-alterations that were mitigated by ST. In addition, ST was effective
against the increase of tumor necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-1 beta levels
and the decrease of interleukin-10 levels in hippocampus and prefrontal cortex.
This study confirmed the hypothesis that exercise is able to protect against some
mechanisms of Aβ₁₋₄₀-induced neurotoxicity. In conclusion, we suggest that
exercise can prevent the cognitive decline, oxidative stress, and
neuroinflammation induced by Aβ₁₋₄₀ in mice supporting the hypothesis that
exercise can be used as a non-pharmacological tool to reduce the symptoms of AD.

PMID: 23307759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 2013 Aug;92(8):676-85. doi: 10.1097/PHM.0b013e318278dcb3.

A longitudinal study of change in falls risk and balance and mobility in healthy 
older people and people with Alzheimer disease.

Suttanon P(1), Hill KD, Said CM, Dodd KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiotherapy, Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, Thammasat
University, Prathum Thani, Thailand.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to determine the rate of change in falls
risk and balance and mobility performance in people with Alzheimer disease (AD)
compared with those of healthy older people over a 1-yr period.
DESIGN: A 1-yr follow-up study of change in levels of falls risk, balance, and
mobility performance in 15 community-dwelling older people with mild to moderate 
AD and 15 healthy age-matched older people was conducted. Each participant
completed a comprehensive assessment of balance and mobility, falls and falls
risk, and level of physical activity at baseline and 1 yr later.
RESULTS: The rate of increase in the number of falls and risk of falling was
greater in people with AD. The rate of deterioration on a number of balance and
mobility measures was also significantly greater in people with AD compared with 
the healthy older people.
CONCLUSIONS: People with mild to moderate AD have an increased rate of decline in
falls risk, balance, and mobility over a 12-mo period compared with age-matched
healthy older people. Given this increased rate of decline, intermittent review
of falls, balance and mobility, and interventions to address identified
contributory risk factors should be considered by health practitioners.

PMID: 23221675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Mol Psychiatry. 2013 Oct;18(10):1053-4. doi: 10.1038/mp.2012.168. Epub 2012 Nov
27.

Amyloid-β oligomers link depressive-like behavior and cognitive deficits in mice.

Ledo JH(1), Azevedo EP, Clarke JR, Ribeiro FC, Figueiredo CP, Foguel D, De Felice
FG, Ferreira ST.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biochemistry, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.

PMCID: PMC3781315
PMID: 23183490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Clin Rehabil. 2013 May;27(5):427-38. doi: 10.1177/0269215512460877. Epub 2012 Nov
1.

Feasibility, safety and preliminary evidence of the effectiveness of a home-based
exercise programme for older people with Alzheimer's disease: a pilot randomized 
controlled trial.

Suttanon P(1), Hill KD, Said CM, Williams SB, Byrne KN, LoGiudice D,
Lautenschlager NT, Dodd KJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Physiotherapy, Faculty of Health Sciences, La Trobe University,
Bundoora, Victoria, Australia. plaiwan2277@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the feasibility and safety of a home-based exercise
programme for people with Alzheimer's disease, and to provide preliminary
evidence of programme effectiveness in improving balance and mobility and
reducing falls risk.
DESIGN: A randomized controlled trial.
SETTING: Community.
PARTICIPANTS: Forty people with mild to moderate Alzheimer's disease (mean age
81.9, SD 5.72; 62.5% female).
INTERVENTIONS: Participants were randomized to a six-month home-based
individually tailored balance, strengthening and walking exercise programme
(physiotherapist) or a six-month home-based education programme (control)
(occupational therapist). Both programmes provided six home-visits and five
follow-up phone calls.
MAIN MEASURES: Balance, mobility, falls and falls risk were measured at baseline 
and programme completion. Intention-to-treat analysis using a generalized linear 
model with group allocation as a predictor variable was performed to evaluate
programme effectiveness. Feasibility and adverse events were systematically
recorded at each contact.
RESULTS: Fifty-eight per cent of the exercise group finished the programme,
completing an average of 83% of prescribed sessions, with no adverse events
reported. Functional Reach improved significantly (P = 0.002) in the exercise
group (mean (SD), 2.28 (4.36)) compared to the control group (-2.99 (4.87)).
Significant improvement was also observed for the Falls Risk for Older People -
Community score (P = 0.008) and trends for improvement on several other balance, 
mobility, falls and falls risk measures for the exercise group compared to the
control group.
CONCLUSIONS: The exercise programme was feasible and safe and may help improve
balance and mobility performance and reduce falls risk in people with Alzheimer's
disease.

PMID: 23117349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Proc Nutr Soc. 2013 Feb;72(1):153-9. doi: 10.1017/S0029665112002741. Epub 2012
Oct 25.

Impact of genetic risk assessment on nutrition-related lifestyle behaviours.

Vernarelli JA.

Author information: 
Department of Nutritional Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University, University
Park, PA 16802, USA. jvern@psu.edu

Genetic susceptibility testing for common complex disease is a practice that is
currently in clinical use. There are two types of gene mutations, and therefore, 
two varieties of genotype testing: deterministic and susceptibility. As the term 
suggests, deterministic genes determine whether or not a person will develop a
given trait in mendelian fashion, such as Huntington's disease. Genotype
screening for such deterministic mutations has existed for decades, and is
commonly used in routine medical practice. In recent years, the sequencing of the
human genome has identified several 'susceptibility genes' or genes with
incomplete penetrance. Mutations in these genes may increase disease
susceptibility, but are not causative for disease. Genetic susceptibility testing
allows unaffected individuals to obtain risk information for a variety of common 
complex diseases and health conditions including Alzheimer's disease (AD), CVD,
cancer and diabetes. The availability of genetic susceptibility testing has
increased over the past decade, and several studies are now focusing on the
impact that genetic testing has on health and other lifestyle behaviours related 
to nutrition. The aim of this paper is to review the literature and evaluate
what, if any, impact genetic risk assessment has on behaviours related to
nutrition and physical activity. This paper summarises seven clinical studies
that evaluated the impact of disclosing genetic risk information for disease on
nutrition-related health behaviour changes. Of these seven studies, only three
studies reported that health behaviour change was influenced by genotype
disclosure.

PMCID: PMC3756543
PMID: 23095764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2013 Jan-Feb;56(1):96-103. doi:
10.1016/j.archger.2012.06.016. Epub 2012 Sep 5.

Walking stabilizes cognitive functioning in Alzheimer's disease (AD) across one
year.

Winchester J(1), Dick MB, Gillen D, Reed B, Miller B, Tinklenberg J, Mungas D,
Chui H, Galasko D, Hewett L, Cotman CW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Memory Impairments & Neurological Disorders, University of
California, Irvine, CA 92697, United States.

AD is a public health epidemic, which seriously impacts cognition, mood and daily
activities; however, one type of activity, exercise, has been shown to alter
these states. Accordingly, we sought to investigate the relationship between
exercise and mood, in early-stage AD patients (N=104) from California, over a
1-year period. Patients completed the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE),
Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS), and Blessed-Roth Dementia Rating Scale (BRDRS),
while their caregivers completed the Yale Physical Activity Survey (YALE),
Profile of Mood States (POMS), the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) and
Functional Abilities Questionnaire (FAQ). Approximately half of the participants 
were female, from a variety of ethnic groups (Caucasian=69.8%; Latino/Hispanic
Americans=20.1%). Our results demonstrated that the patients spent little time
engaged in physical activity in general, their overall activity levels decreased 
over time, and this was paired with a change in global cognition (e.g., MMSE
total score) and affect/mood (e.g., POMS score). Patients were parsed into Active
and Sedentary groups based on their Yale profiles, with Active participants
engaged in walking activities, weekly, over 1 year. Here, Sedentary patients had 
a significant decline in MMSE scores, while the Active patients had an
attenuation in global cognitive decline. Importantly, among the Active AD
patients, those individuals who engaged in walking for more than 2 h/week had a
significant improvement in MMSE scores. Structured clinical trials which seek to 
increase the amount of time AD patients were engaged in walking activities and
evaluate the nature and scope of beneficial effects in the brain are warranted.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3766353
PMID: 22959822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Geriatr Gerontol Int. 2013 Apr;13(2):437-42. doi:
10.1111/j.1447-0594.2012.00927.x. Epub 2012 Aug 31.

Global brain atrophy is associated with physical performance and the risk of
falls in older adults with cognitive impairment.

Yamada M(1), Takechi H, Mori S, Aoyama T, Arai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Health Sciences, Kyoto University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. yamada@hs.med.kyoto-u.ac.jp

AIM: Falls are common in patients with cognitive disorder. The purpose of this
study was to determine whether global brain atrophy is associated with cognitive 
function, physical performance and fall incidents in older adults with mild
cognitive disorder.
METHODS: A total of 31 older adults with mild cognitive disorders (mean age 78.9 
± 7.3 years) were studied, and 10 of them had experienced falls and the others
had not in the past 1 year. Cognitive function and physical performance were
measured in these patients. Global brain atrophy was determined by the
Voxel-Based Specific Regional Analysis System for Alzheimer's Disease software.
RESULTS: Fallers showed significantly worse scores than the non-fallers in the
Global Brain Atrophy Index, Clock Drawing Test (CDT), Verbal Fluency Test
(animal), maximum walking time and Timed Up & Go (TUG) Test. The Global Brain
Atrophy Index was correlated with the Verbal Fluency Test (animal; r = -0.522),
the Verbal Fluency Test with letter (ka; r = -0.337), CDT (r = -0.547), TUG (r = 
0.276) and Five Chair Stands Test (r = 0.303) by age-adjusted correlation
analyses. Stepwise regression analysis showed that the Global Brain Atrophy Index
(β = 1.265, 95% CI 1.022-1.567) was a significant and independent determinant of 
falls (R(2) = 0.356, P = 0.003).
CONCLUSION: Global brain atrophy might be indicated as one of the risk factors
for falls in older adults with mild cognitive disorders.

© 2012 Japan Geriatrics Society.

PMID: 22935103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Geriatr Gerontol Int. 2013 Apr;13(2):322-8. doi:
10.1111/j.1447-0594.2012.00899.x. Epub 2012 Jun 21.

Effects of resistance training on the performance of activities of daily living
in patients with Alzheimer's disease.

Garuffi M(1), Costa JL, Hernández SS, Vital TM, Stein AM, dos Santos JG, Stella
F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences, Department of Physical Education, UNESP - University
Estadual Paulista, São Paulo, Brazil. marcelo.garuffi@gmail.com

AIM: The objective of this study was to investigate the effects of resistance
training in activities of daily living performance in Alzheimer's disease (AD)
patients.
METHODS: An exploratory and longitudinal study, lasting for 16 weeks, with the
participation of 34 patients divided equally in: the training group (TG), who
participated in a resistance training protocol (three sets of 20 repetitions in
five exercises); and the social gathering group (SGG), who participated in a
social interaction protocol (i.e. group dynamics, writing and reading
activities).
RESULTS: We observed significant differences between the groups in moving around 
the house, climbing stairs, standing up from the floor and putting on socks
tests.
CONCLUSION: This study showed that resistance training improves agility, lower
limb strength, balance and flexibility in AD patients, while SGG protocol is
important to improve the agility.

© 2012 Japan Geriatrics Society.

PMID: 22726761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. West J Nurs Res. 2013 Jan;35(1):24-38. doi: 10.1177/0193945911420174. Epub 2011
Sep 12.

Affecting cognition and quality of life via aerobic exercise in Alzheimer's
disease.

Yu F(1), Nelson NW, Savik K, Wyman JF, Dysken M, Bronas UG.

Author information: 
(1)University of Minnesota School of Nursing, Minneapolis 55455, USA.
yuxxx244@umn.edu

Aerobic exercise is a promising behavioral therapy for Alzheimer's disease (AD), 
yet few studies have investigated the effect of aerobic exercise on cognition in 
AD. The purpose of this pilot study was to examine the effect of 6-month aerobic 
exercise on the change in executive function, global cognition, quality of life
(QOL), and depression in community-dwelling older adults with mild to moderate
AD. A single group, repeated measures design with outcomes measured at baseline, 
3 months, and 6 months was used. Results show that there were no significant
changes in any measures except for depression (p = .026). There was a trend
toward improvement in executive function and QOL with moderate effect sizes (ESs)
and a trend toward deterioration in global cognition with moderate to large ESs. 
Randomized controlled trials are needed to evaluate the therapeutic effect of
aerobic exercise in older adults with AD.

PMID: 21911546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

